Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995

1. Short title, extent and commencement
(1)

This Act may be called the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995.
(2)

It extends to the whole of India.
(3)

It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 29th day of September, 1994.

2. Definitions
In

this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a)

"cable operator' means any person who provides cable service through a

cable television network or otherwise controls or is responsible for the management

and operation of a cable television network;
(b)

"cable service" means the transmission by cables of programmes

including re-transmission by cable of any broadcast television signals;
(c)

"cable television network" means any system consisting of a set of

closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, control and

distribution equipment, designed to provide cable service for reception by

multiple subscribers;
(d)

"company" means a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act,

1956 (1 of 1956);
(e)

"person" means-
(i) an individual who is a citizen of India;
(ii) an association of individuals or body of individuals, whether

incorporated or not, whose members are citizen of India;
(iii) a company in which not less than fifty-one percent of the paid up

share capital is held by the citizens of India;
(f)

"prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g)

"programme" means any television broadcast and includes-
(i) exhibition of films, features, dramas, advertisement and serials

through video cassette recorders or video cassette players;
(ii) any audio or visual or audio-visual live performance or

presentation, and the expression "programme service" shall be

construed accordingly;
(h)

"registering authority" means such authority as the Central

Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify to perform the

functions of the registering authority under this Act;
(i)

"subscriber" means a person who receives the signals of cable

television network at a place indicated by him to the cable operator, without

further transmitting it to any other person.

3. Cable television network not to be operated

except after registration
No

person shall operate a cable television network unless he is registered as a

cable operator under this Act:
PROVIDED

that a person operating a cable television network, immediately before

the commencement of this act, may continue to do so for a period of ninety days

from such commencement; and if he has made an application for registration as a

cable operator under section 4 within the said period, till he is registered

under that section or the registering authority refuses to grant registration

to him under that section.

4. Registration as cable operator
(1)

Any person who is operating or is desirous of operating a cable television

network may apply for registration as a cable operator to the registering

authority.
(2)

An application under sub-section (1) shall be made in such form and be

accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.
(3)

On receipt of the application, the registering authority shall satisfy itself

that the applicant has furnished all the required information and on being so

satisfied, register the applicant as a cable operator and grant to him a

certificate of such registration:
PROVIDED

that the registering authority may, for reasons to be recorded in

writing and communicated to the applicant, refuse to grant registration to him

if it is satisfied that he does not fulfil the conditions specified in clause

(e) of section 2.

5. Programme code
No

person shall transmit or re-transmit through a cable service any programme

unless such programme is in conformity with the prescribed programme code:
PROVIDED

that nothing in this section shall apply to the programmes of foreign

satellite channels which can be received without the use of any specialised

gadgets or decoder.

6. Advertisement code
No

person shall transmit or re-transmit through a cable service any advertisement

unless such advertisement is in conformity with the prescribed advertisement

code:
PROVIDED

that nothing in this section shall apply to the programmes of foreign

satellite channels which can be received without the use of any specialised

gadgets or decoder.

7. Maintenance of register
Every

cable operator shall maintain a register in the prescribed form indicating

therein in brief the programmes transmitted or re-transmitted through the cable

service during a month and such register shall be maintained by the cable

operator for a period of one year after the actual transmission or

re-transmission of the said programmes.

8. Compulsory transmission of two Doordarshan

channels
(1)

Every cable operator using a dish antenna or Television Receiver only shall,

from the commencement of this Act, re-transmit at least two Doordarshan

channels of his choice through the cable service.
(2)

The Doordarshan channels referred to in sub-section (1) shall be re-transmitted

without any deletion or alteration of any programme transmitted on such

channels.

9. Use of standard equipment in cable

Television network
No

cable operator shall, on and from the date of the expiry of a period of three years

from the date of the establishment and publication of the Indian Standard by

the Bureau of Indian Standards in accordance with the provisions of the Bureau

of Indian Standards Act, 1986 (63 of 1986), use any equipment in his cable

television network unless such equipment conforms to the said Indian Standard.

10. Cable Television network not to interfere

with any telecommunication system.
Every

cable operator shall ensure that the cable Television network being operated by

him does not interfere, in any way, with the functioning of the authorised

telecommunication systems.

11. Power to seize equipment used for

operating the cable television network
(1)

If any officer, not below the rank of a Group 'A' officer of the Central

Government authorised in this behalf by the Government (hereinafter referred to

as the authorised officer), has reason to believe that the provisions of

section 3 have been or are being contravened by any cable operator, he may

seize the equipment being used by such cable operator for operating the cable

television network.
(2)

No such equipment shall be retained by the authorised officer for a period

exceeding ten days from the date of its seizure unless the approval of the

District Judge, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such seizure has

been made, has been obtained for such retention.

12. Confiscation
The

equipment seized under sub-section (1) of section 11 shall be liable to

confiscation unless the cable operator from whom the equipment has been seized

registers himself as a cable operator under section 4 within a period of thirty

days from the date of seizure of the said equipment.

13. Seizure or confiscation of equipment not

to interfere with the other punishment
No

seizure or confiscation of equipment referred to in section 11 of section 12

shall prevent the infliction of any punishment to which the person affected

thereby is liable under the provisions of this Act.

14. Giving of opportunity to the cable

operator of seized equipment
(1)

No order adjudicating confiscation of the equipment referred to in section 12

shall be made unless the cable operator has been given a notice in writing

informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to confiscate such

equipment and giving him a reasonable opportunity of making a representation in

writing, within such reasonable time as may be specified in the notice against

the confiscation and if he so desires of being heard in the matter:
PROVIDED

that where no such notice is given within a period of ten days from the

days of the seizure of the equipment, such equipment shall be returned after

the expiry of that period to the cable operator from whose possession it was

seized.
(2)

Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), the provisions of the Code of

Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall, so far as may be, apply to every

proceeding referred to in sub-section (1).

15. Appeal
(1)

Any person aggrieved by any decision of the court adjudicating a confiscation

of the equipment may prefer an appeal to the court to which an appeal lies from

the decision of such court.
(2)

The appellate court may, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being

heard, pass such order as it thinks fit confirming, modifying or revising the

decision appealed against or may send back the case with such directions as it

may think fit for a fresh decision or adjudication, as the case may be, after

taking additional evidence if necessary.
(3)

No further appeal shall lie against the order of the court made under

sub-section (2).

16. Punishment for contravention of provisions

of this Act
Whoever

contravenes any of the provisions of this Act shall be punishable,-
(a)

for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two

years or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both;
(b)

for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to

five years and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.

17. Offences by companies
(1)Where

an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who, at

the time the offence was committed, was incharge of and was responsible to the

company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company,

shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded

against and punished accordingly:
PROVIDED

that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person

liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without

his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the

commission of such offence.
(2)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under

this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has

been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any

negligence on the part of , any director, manager, secretary or other officer

of the company, such director, manager, secretary or the officer shall also be

deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against

and punished accordingly.
Explanation:

For the purposes of this section,-
(a)

"company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other

association of individuals; and
(b)

"director" in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

18. Cognizance of offences
No

court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except

upon a compliant in writing made by such officer, not below the rank of a Group

'A' officer of the Central Government, as the State Government may, by

notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.

19. Power to prohibit transmission of certain

programmes in public interest
Where

an officer, not below the rank of a Group 'A' officer of the Central Government

authorised by the State Government in this behalf, thinks it necessary or

expedient so to do in the public interest, he may, by order, prohibit any cable

operator from transmitting or re-transmitting any particular programme if it is

likely to promote, on grounds of religion, race, language, caste or community

or any other ground whatsoever, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or

ill-will between different religious, racial, linguistic or regional groups or

castes or communities or which is likely to disturb the public tranquillity.

20. Power to prohibit operation of cable

television network in public interest
Where

the Central Government thinks it necessary or expedient so to do in public

interest, it may prohibit the operation of any cable television network in such

areas as it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this

behalf.

21. Application of other laws not barred
The

provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the

Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), the Pharmacy Act, 1948 (8 of 1948),

the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950 (12 of 1950), the

Drugs (Control) Act, 1950 (26 of 1950), the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of

1952), the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954

(21 of 1954), the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954), the

Prize Competitions Act, 1955 (42 of 1955), the Copyright Act, 1957 (14 of

1957), the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958), the Indecent

Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 (60 of 1986) and the Consumer

Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986)

22. Power to make rules
(1)

The Central Government may, by notification in the Officer Gazette, make rules

to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2)

In particulars, and without prejudice to the generality of the forgoing power, such

rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the form of application and the fee payable under sub-section (2) of

section 4;
(b) the programme code under section 5;
(c) the advertisement code under section 6;
(d) the form of register to be maintained by a cable operator under

section 7;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3)

Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is

made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total

period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more

successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately

following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree

in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule

should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified

form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such

modification or annulment shall without prejudice to the validity of anything

previously done under that rule.

23. Repeal and saving
(1)

The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Ordinance, 1995 (3 of 1995) is

hereby repealed.
(2)

Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said

Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding

provisions of this Act.