Charitable and Religious Trusts Act ,1920

1. Short title and extent
(1) This Act may be called the Charitable and Religious Trusts

Acts, 1920.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir :
PROVIDED that the Government at any State may, be notification in the Official Gazette, direct that

this Act, or any specified part thereof, shall not extend to that State or any

specified area therein, or to any specified trust or class of trusts.

2. Interpretation
In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject

or context, "the Court" means the Court of the District Judge or any

other Court empowered in that behalf by the State Government and includes the

High Court in the exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction.

3. Power to apply to the Court in respect of trusts of a

charitable or religious nature
Save as hereinafter provided in this Act, any person having an

interest in any express or constructive trust created or existing for a public

purpose of a charitable or religious nature may apply by petition to the Court

within the local limits of whose jurisdiction any substantial part of the

subject-matter of the trust is situate to obtain an order embodying all or any

of the following directions, namely:-
(1) directing the trustee to furnish the petitioner through the

Court with particulars as to the nature and objects of the trust, and of the

value condition, management and application of the subject-matter of the trust,

and of the income belonging thereto, or as any of these matters, and
(2) directing that the accounts of the trusts shall be examined

and audited:
PROVIDED that no person shall apply for any such

direction in respect of accounts relating to a period more than three years

prior to the date of the petition.

4. Contents and verification of petition
(1) The petition shall show in what way the petitioner claims to

be interested in the trust, and shall specify, as far as may be, the

particulars and the audit which he seeks to obtain.
(2) The petition shall be in writing and shall be signed and verified

in the manner prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for

signing and verifying plaints.

5. Procedure on petition
(1) If the court on receipt of a petition under section 3, after

taking such evidence and making such inquiry, if any, as it may consider

necessary, is of opinion that the trust to which the petition relates is a

trust to which this Act applies, and that the petitioner has an interest

therein, it shall fix a date for the hearing of the petition, and shall cause a

copy thereof, together with notice of the date so fixed, to be served on the

trustee and upon any other person to whom in its opinion notice of the petition

should be given.
(2) On the date fixed for the hearing of the petition, or on any

subsequent date to which the hearing may be adjourned, the Court shall proceed

to hear the petitioner and the trustee, if he appears, and any other person who

has appeared in consequence of the notice, or who it considers ought to be

heard, and shall make such further inquiries, if any, as it thinks fit. The

trustee may and, if so required by the court, shall at the time of the first

hearing or within such time as the Court may permit present a written statement

of his case. If he does present a written statement, the statement shall be

signed and verified in the manner prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure,

1908 (5 of 1908), for signing and verifying pleadings.
(3) If any person appears at the hearing of the petition and

either denies the existence of the trust or denies that it is a trust to which

this Act applies, and undertakes to institute within three months a suit for a

declaration to that effect and for any other appropriate relief, the court

shall order a stay of the proceedings and, if such suit is so instituted, shall

continue the stay until the suit is finally decided.
(4) If no such undertaking is given, or if after the expiry of

the three months no such suit has been instituted, the Court shall itself

decide the question.
(5) On completion of the inquiry provided for in sub-section

(2), the Court shall either dismiss the petition or pass thereon such other

order as it thinks fit:
PROVIDED that, where a suit has been instituted in

accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3), no order shall be passed by

the Court which conflicts with the final decision therein.
(6) Save as provided in this section, the Court shall not try or

determine any question of title between the petitioner and any person claiming

title adversely to the trust.

6. Failure of trustee to comply with order under section 5


If a trustee without reasonable excuse fails to comply with an

order made under sub-section (5) of section 5, such trustee shall, without

prejudice to any other penalty or liability which he may incur under any law

for the time being in force, be deemed to have committed a breach of trust

affording ground for a suit under the provisions of section 92 of the Code of

Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), and any such suit may, so far as it is based

on such failure, be instituted without the previous consent of the Advocate

General.

7. Powers of trustee to apply for directions
(1) Save as hereinafter provided in this Act, any trustee of an

express or constructive trust created or existing for public purpose of a

charitable or religious nature may apply by petition to the Court, within the

local limits of whose jurisdiction any substantial part of the subject-matter

of the trust is situate, for the opinion, advise or direction of the Court on

any question affecting the management or administration of the trust property,

and the Court shall give its opinion, advice or direction, as the case may be,

thereon:
PROVIDED that the Court shall not be bound to give

such opinion, advice or direction on any question which it considers to be a

question not proper for summary disposal.
(2) The Court on a petition under sub-section (1), may either

give its opinion, advice or direction thereon forthwith, or fix a date for the

hearing of the petition, and may direct a copy thereof, together with notice of

the date so fixed, to be served on such of the persons interested in the trust,

or to be published for information in such manner, as it thinks fit.
(3) On any date fixed under sub-section (2) or any subsequent

date to which the hearing may be adjourned, the Court, before giving any

opinion, advice or direction, shall afford a reasonable opportunity of being

heard to all persons appearing in connection with the petition.
(4) A trustee stating in good faith the facts of any matter

relating to the trust in a petition under sub-section (1), and acting upon the

opinion, advice or direction of the Court given thereon, shall be deemed, as

far as his own responsibility is concerned, to have discharged his duty as such

trustee in the matter in respect of which the petition was made.

8. Costs of petition under this Act
The costs, charges and expenses of and incidental to any

petition, and all proceedings in connection therewith, under the foregoing

provisions of this Act, shall be in the discretion of the Court, which may

direct the whole or any part of any such costs, charges and expenses to be met

from the property or income of the trust in respect of which the petition is

made, or to be borne and paid in such manner and by such persons as it thinks

fit:
PROVIDED that no such order shall be made against any

person (other than the petitioner) who has not received notification of the

petition and had a reasonable opportunity of being heard thereon.

9. Saving
No petition under the foregoing provisions of this Act in

relation to any trust shall be entertained in any of the following

circumstances, namely:-
(a) if a suit instituted in accordance with the provisions of

section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), is pending in

respect of the trust in question;
(b) If the trust property is vested in the Treasurer of

Charitable Endowments, the Administrator-General, the Official Trustee, or any

Society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860); or
(c) if a scheme for the administration of the trust property has

been settled or approved by any Court of competent jurisdiction, or by any

other authority acting under the provisions of any enactment.

10. Power of Courts as to costs in certain suits against

trustees of charitable and religious trusts
(1) In any suit instituted under section l4 of the Religious

Endowments Act, 1863, (20 of 1863) or under section 92 of the Code of Civil

Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), the Court trying such suit may, if, on application

of the plaintiff and after hearing the defendant and making such inquiry as it

thinks fit, it is satisfied that such an order is necessary in the public

interest, direct the defendant either to furnish security for any expenditure

incurred or likely to be incurred by the plaintiff in instituting and

maintaining such suit, or to deposit from any money in his hands as trustee of

the trust to which the suit relates such sum as such Court considers sufficient

to meet such expenditure in whole or in part.
(2) When any money has been deposited in accordance with an

order made under sub-section (1), the Court may make over to the plaintiff the

whole or any part of such sum for the conduct of the suit. Before making over

any sum to the plaintiff, the Court shall take security from the plaintiff for

the refund of the same in the event of such refund being subsequently ordered

by the Court.

11. Provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure
(1) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of

1908), relating to-
(a) the proof of facts by affidavit,
(b) the enforcing of the attendance of any person and his

examination oath,
(c) the enforcing. of the production of documents, and
(d) the issuing of commissions,
shall apply to all proceedings under this Act, and the

provisions relating to the service of summonses shall apply to the service of

notice thereunder .
(2) The provisions of the said Code relating to the execution of

decrees shall, so far as they are applicable, apply to the execution of orders

under this Act.

12. Barring of appeals
No appeal shall lie from any order passed or against any

opinion, advice or direction given under this Act.