The Extradition Act, 1962

CHAP
Preliminary
Chapter I
Preliminary
1. Short title, extent

and commencement.Ā

2.Ā Definitions.
In this Act, unless the

context otherwise requires,--
*The provisions of the

Act, other than Chapter III, shall apply toĀĀ  Papua New Guinea w.e.f. 1-9-1978, vide Notifn. No.

G.S.R. 433 (E), dated 17.8.1978, Gaz.Ā of  India  ,Ā Exty.,Ā Pt. II, Sec. 3(i), p. 748.
*The provisions of the

Act, other than Chapter III, shall apply to  Fiji w.e.f.  1-2-1979, vide Notifn. No.

G.S.R. 38(E), dt.  22-1-1979  , Gaz. Of  India  , Exty., Pt. II, Sec. 3(i), p. 58.
*The provisions of The

Act, other than Chapter III, shall apply to the Commonwealth of Australia

w.e.f. 30.8.1971, vide Notifn. No. G.S.R. 1381, dt. 30.8.1971, Gaz.Ā of India,Ā Exty., Pt. II, Sec.

3(i), p-895.

3. Application of Act.Ā

Chapter II
EXTRADITION OF FUGITIVE

CRIMINALS TO FOREIGN STATES 2*** TO WHICH
CHAPTER III
DOES NOT APPLY
4. Requisition for

surrender.
A requisition for the

surrender of a fugitive criminal of a foreign State 3***ĀĀ may be made to the

Central Government--

5. Order for magisterial

inquiry.
Where such requisition

is made, the Central Government may, if it thinks fit, issue an order to any

magistrate who would have had jurisdiction to inquire into the offence if it

had been an offence committed within the local limits of his jurisdiction,

directing him to inquire into the case.

6. Issue of warrant for

arrest.Ā
On receipt of an order

of the Central Government under section 5, the magistrate shall issue a warrant

for the arrest of the fugitive criminal.

7. Procedure before

magistrate.Ā

8. Surrender of fugitive

criminal.
If, upon receipt of the

reportĀ andĀ statementĀ underĀ sub-sectionĀ (4)Ā ofĀ sectionĀ 7,Ā theĀ CentralĀ

Government isĀ of opinionĀ that theĀ fugitiveĀ criminalĀ oughtĀ toĀ beĀ

surrendered to the foreign State 1***,Ā it may issue a warrant for theĀ custody

and removal of the fugitive criminal and for his delivery at aĀ place and to a

person to be named in the warrant.

9. Power of magistrate

to issue warrant of arrest in certain cases.

10. Receipt inĀ

evidenceĀ ofĀ exhibits,Ā depositionsĀ andĀ other documents and authentication

thereof.
1.ĀĀ Omitted by Act 66

of 1993, s. 3 (w.e.f.  18-9-1993  ).
2.ĀĀ Omitted by s. 7.

ibid (w.e.f 18-12-19930.

11. Chapter not to apply

to foreign states countries to which Chapter III applies.
Nothing contained in

this Chapter shall apply to fugitiveĀ criminals 1*** to which Chapter III

applies.

CHAPTER III
RETURN OF FUGITIVE

CRIMINALS TO [FOREIGN STATES] 2* WITH EXTRADITION
ARRANGEMENTS
12. Application of

Chapter.

13. Liability of

fugitive criminals from foreign states to be apprehended and returned.Ā
Where a fugitive

criminal of any 3*[foreign state]ĀĀ to which this Chapter applies is found in

India, he shall be liable to be apprehended and returned in the manner provided

by this Chapter to that 3*[foreign state].

14. Endorsed and

provisional warrants.
A fugitive criminal may

be apprehended in India under an endorsed warrant or a provisional warrant.

15. Endorsed warrant for

apprehension of fugitive criminal.
WhereĀ a warrantĀ for

the apprehension of a fugitive criminal has been issued in any 3*[foreign

state]ĀĀ toĀ whichĀ thisĀ Chapter appliesĀ andĀ such fugitive criminalĀ is, orĀ

is suspectedĀ to be,Ā in India, the Central Government may,Ā if satisfiedĀ that

the warrant was issued by a personĀ having lawful authority to issue the same,

endorse such warrant in theĀ manner prescribed,Ā and theĀ warrant soĀ endorsed

shallĀ be sufficientĀ authority toĀ apprehend theĀ person namedĀ in the warrant

and to bring him before and magistrate in India.
Chapter III - Return of fatitive

criminals to foreign state with extradition arrangements.)

16. Provisional warrant

for apprehension of fugitive criminal.

17. Dealing with

fugitive criminal when apprehended.

18.Ā ReturnĀĀ of

fugitiveĀĀ criminal by warrant.Ā
TheĀ CentralĀ Government

may,Ā at anyĀ timeĀ afterĀ aĀ fugitiveĀ criminalĀ hasĀ been committed to prison

under this Chapter, issue (Chapter III Return of fugitive criminals to foreign

states with extradition arrangements.Ā

19.Chapter IV.-

Surrender or return of accused or accused or convicted persons from foreign

States.
a warrantĀ for theĀ

custody andĀ removal toĀ the commonwealthĀ country concerned of the fugitive

criminal and for his delivery at a place and to a person to be named in the

warrant.

Chapter IV
SURRENDER OR RETURN OF

ACCUSED OR CONVICTED PERSONS FROM FOREIGN
STATES 1***
20. Conveyance of

accused or convicted person surrendered or returned.
AnyĀ person accusedĀ or

convictedĀ of an extradition offence who is surrendered or returned by a

foreign State or 2***Ā may, under the warrant of arrest for his surrender or

return issued in such State or country,Ā beĀ broughtĀ intoĀ IndiaĀ andĀ

deliveredĀ toĀ theĀ proper authority to be dealt with according to law.

21. Accused or

convicted person surrendered or returned by foreign State not to be tried for

certain offences.Ā
WheneverĀ any person

accusedĀ or convictedĀ of anĀ offence, which,Ā if committedĀ in India would be

an extradition offence, is surrendered or returned by a foreign State,Ā such

personĀ shall not,Ā until he has been restored or has hadĀ an opportunityĀ of

returning to that State, be tried in India for an offence other than--

CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
22.Ā LiabilityĀĀ of

fugitiveĀĀ criminals toĀĀ be arrested and surrendered or returned.
EveryĀ fugitive

criminalĀ of a foreign StateĀ 1*xxx shall,Ā subject toĀ the provisionsĀ of this

Act, be liable to beĀ arrested andĀ surrendered orĀ returned, whether the

offence in respectĀ of whichĀ the surrenderĀ or returnĀ is soughtĀ was

committed before orĀ after theĀ commencement ofĀ this Act,Ā and whetherĀ or

notĀ a court in India has jurisdiction to try that offence.

23. Jurisdiction as to

offences committed at sea or in air.
WhereĀ the offenceĀ in

respect of which the surrender or return of a fugitive criminal isĀ sought was

committed on board any vessel on the high seas or anyĀ aircraftĀ whileĀ inĀ

theĀ airĀ outsideĀ IndiaĀ orĀ theĀ IndianĀ territorial watersĀ which comesĀ

into anyĀ port or aerodrome of India, the CentralĀ Government and any

magistrate having jurisdiction in such port or aerodrome may exercise the

powers conferred by this Act.

24.Ā Discharge of person

apprehended if not surrendered or returned within two months.
if a fugitive criminal

who, in pursuance of thisĀ Act, hasĀ been committedĀ to prison to await his

surrender or return toĀ any foreign State 1*xxx is not conveyed out of India

within two months after such committal, the High Court, upon application made

to itĀ by orĀ on behalfĀ of theĀ fugitive criminal and upon proof that

reasonable noticeĀ of theĀ intention to make such application has been given

toĀ the CentralĀ Government,Ā mayĀ orderĀ suchĀ prisonerĀ toĀ be discharged

unless sufficient cause is shown to the contrary.

25. Release of persons

arrested on bail.
In the case of a person

who isĀ a fugitiveĀ criminal arrestedĀ or detained under this Act, the

provisions ofĀ the 2*[CodeĀ of CriminalĀ Procedure, 1973]Ā (2 of 1974) relating

to bail shall apply in the same manner as they would apply if such personĀ were

accusedĀ of committing in India the offence of which he is accused or has been

convicted, and in relation to such bail, the magistrate before whom the

fugitive criminal is brought shall have, as far asĀ may be, the same powers and

jurisdiction as a court of session under that Code.

26. Abetment of

extradition Offences.
A fugitive criminal who

is accused or convicted of abetting 1*[,conspiring, attempting to commit,

inciting orĀ participating as an accomplice in the commissionĀ of] any

extradition offence shall be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be accused

orĀ convicted ofĀ having committedĀ such offenceĀ and shall be liable to be

arrested and surrendered accordingly.

27. Lawfulness of and

re-taking on escape from custody under warrants.
ItĀ shall beĀ lawful forĀ

any personĀ to whomĀ a warrantĀ is directed forĀ the apprehensionĀ of aĀ

fugitiveĀ criminalĀ toĀ holdĀ in custody andĀ convey theĀ person mentionedĀ in

the warrant to the place named in the warrant, and if such person escapes out

of any custody to which heĀ may be delivered in pursuance of such warrant, he

may be re taken asĀ a personĀ accused of an offence against the law of India

may be re-taken upon an escape.

28. Property found on

fugitive criminal .
Everything found in the

possession ofĀ a fugitive criminal at the time of his arrest which may be

materialĀ as evidenceĀ in provingĀ the extraditionĀ offence mayĀ be delivered

upĀ with theĀ fugitive criminalĀ on his surrender or return, subject to the

rights, if any, of third parties with respect thereto.

29.Ā Power of Central

Government to discharge any fugitive criminal.
IfĀ it appearsĀ to theĀ

Central Government that by reason ofĀ the trivial nature of the case or by

reason of the application for theĀ surrender orĀ return ofĀ a fugitiveĀ

criminal not being madeĀ in goodĀ faith orĀ in theĀ interests ofĀ justice orĀ

for politicalĀ reasonsĀ orĀ otherwise, itĀ is unjustĀ or inexpedientĀ to

surrenderĀ or returnĀ theĀ fugitive criminal,Ā it may, by order, at any time

stay any proceedings under thisĀ Act andĀ direct anyĀ warrant issued or

endorsed under this Act toĀ be cancelledĀ and theĀ person for whose arrest the

warrant has been issued or endorsed to be discharged.

30. Simultaneous

requisitions.Ā
If requisitions for the

surrender of aĀ fugitive criminal are received from more than one foreign

StateĀ 2***,Ā theĀ Central Government may, having regard to the circumstances

of theĀ case, surrender the fugitive criminal to such State or country as that

Government thinks fit.

31. Restrictions on

surrender. 3* [(1)] A fugitive criminal shall not be surrendered or returned to

a foreign State 4***.

32. Sections 29 and 31

to apply without any modification thereof.
Notwithstanding

anythingĀ to theĀ contrary containedĀ in sectionĀ 3 or section 12,Ā the

provisionsĀ of sections 29 and 31 shall apply without any modification to every

foreign State 1*xxx.

33. Act not to affect

the Foreigners Act, 1946.
Nothing in this Act

shall affect the provisions of the Foreigners Act. 1946, (31 of 1946), or any

order made there under.

34. Extra

territorial jurisdiction.Ā
An extraditionĀ offence

committed byĀ any personĀ in aĀ foreign StateĀ shall be deemed to have been

committedĀ in IndiaĀ andĀ suchĀ personĀ shallĀ beĀ liableĀ toĀ be prosecuted in

India for such offence.

35.Ā NotifiedĀĀ orders

andĀĀ notifications to be laid before Parliament.
Every notified order

made or notification issued under this Act shall, as soon as may be after it is

made or issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.

36. Power to make rules.

37. Repeals and

savings.Ā