Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970

1. Short title, extent and commencement 
(l) This Act may be called the Indian Medicine

Central Council Act, 1970.
(2) It extends to the whole of India .
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such

date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,

appoint in this behalf for such State, and different dates may be appointed for

different States and for different provisions of this Act.

2. Definitions 
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise

requires,
(a) "approved

institution" means a teaching institution, health centre or hospital

recognized by a  University or Board as an institution in which a person

may undergo the training, if any, required by his course of study before the

award of any medical qualification to him;
(b) "Board"

means a Board, Council, Examining Body or Faculty of Indian Medicine (by the

whatever name called) constituted by the State Government under any law for the

time of being in force regulating the award of medical qualifications in, and

registration of practitioners of, Indian medicine;
(c) "Central

Council" means the Central Council of Indian Medicine constituted under

section 3;
(d) "Central Register 

of Indian Medicine" means the register maintained by the Central Council under 

this Act
(e) "Indian

Medicine" means the system of Indian medicine commonly known as  Ashtang Ayurveda ,  Siddha or Unani  Tibb whether supplemented or not by such modern advances as

the Central Council may declare by notification from time to time;
(f) " medical institution" means any institution within or

without  India which grants degrees,

diplomas or licenses, in Indian medicine;
(g) " prescribed " means prescribed by regulations;
(h) " recognized medical qualification" means any of the

medical qualification, including post-graduate medical qualification, of Indian

medicine included in the Second, Third or Fourth Schedule;
( i )

" regulation " means a regulation made under

section 36;
(j) "State

Register of Indian Medicine" means a register or registers maintained

under any law for the time being in force in any State regulating the

registration of practitioners of Indian medicine;
(k)

"University" means any University in India established by law

and having a Faculty of Indian Medicine and includes a University in India established by law in

which instruction, teaching, training or research in Indian medicine is

provided.
(2) Any reference in this Act to a law which

is not in force in the State of  Jammu and Kashmir shall, in relation to

that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in

force in that State.

3. Constitution of Central Council 
(1) The Central Government shall, by

notification in the Official Gazette constitute for the purposes of this Act a

Central Council consisting of the following members, namely:-
(a) such number of

members not exceeding five as may be determined by the Central Government in

accordance with the provisions of the First Schedule for each of the  Ayurveda , Siddha and  Unani systems of medicine from each State in which a State

Register of Indian Medicine is maintained, to be elected from amongst

themselves by persons enrolled on that Register as practitioners of  Ayurveda , Siddha or  Unani , as the case may be;
(b) one 

member for each of the Ayurveda , Siddha 

and Unani systems of medicine from each University to

be elected from amongst themselves by the members of the Faculty or Department

(by whatever name called) of the respective system of medicine of that

University;
(c) such 

number of members, not exceeding thirty per cent. of the total number of

members elected under clauses (a) and (b), as may be nominated by the Central

Government, from amongst persons having special knowledge or practical

experience in respect of Indian medicine:
Provided  that until members are elected under

clause (a) or clause (b) in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the

rules made thereunder , the Central Government shall

nominate such number of members, being persons qualified to be chosen as such

under the said clause (a) or clause (b), as the case may be, as that Government

thinks fit; and references to elected members in this Act shall be construed as

including references to members so nominated.
(2) The President of the Central Council shall

be elected by the members, of the Central Council, from amongst themselves in

such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall be a Vice-President for each

of the Ayurveda , Siddha and

 Unani systems of medicine who shall be elected from

amongst themselves by members representing that system of medicine, elected

under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) or nominated under clause (c )of that sub-section.

4. Mode of election 
(1) An election under clause (a) or clause (b)

of sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be conducted by the Central Government in

accordance with such rules as may be made by it in this behalf.
(2) Where any dispute arises regarding any election

to the Central Council, it shall be referred to the Central Government whose

decision shall be final.

5. Restriction on elections and membership 
(1) No person shall be eligible for election to

the Central Council unless he possesses any of the medical qualifications

included in the Second, Third or Fourth Schedule, is

enrolled on any State Register of Indian Medicine and resides in the State

concerned.
(2) No person may at the same time serve as a

member in more than one capacity.

6. Incorporation of Central Council 
The Central Council shall be a body corporate

by the name of Central Council of Indian Medicine having perpetual succession

and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both

movable, and immovable and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be

sued.

7. Term of office of President, Vice-President

and members of Central Council 
(1) The President, a Vice-President or a

member of the Central Council shall hold office for a term of five years from

the date of his election or nomination, as the case may be, or until his

successor shall have been duly elected or nominated, whichever is longer.
(2) An elected or nominated member shall be

deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent without-excuse, sufficient in

the opinion of the Central Council, from three consecutive ordinary meetings of

the Central Council or, in the case of a member elected under clause (a) of

sub-section (1) of section 3, if he ceases to be enrolled on the concerned

State Register of Indian Medicine, or in the case of a member elected under

clause (b) of that sub-section, if he ceases to be a member of the Faculty or

Department (by whatever name called) of Indian Medicine of the University

concerned.
(3) A casual vacancy in the Central Council 

shall be filled by election or nomination, as the case may be, and the person 

elected or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the 

remainder of the term for which the member whose place he takes was elected or 

nominated
(4) Members of the Central Council shall be

eligible for re-election or re-nomination.
(5) Where the said term of five years is about

to expire in respect of any member, a successor may be elected or nominated at

any time within three months before the said term expires but he shall not

assume office until the said term has expired.

8. Meeting of Central Council
(1) The Central Council shall meet at least

once in each year at such time and place as may be appointed by the Central

Council.
(2) Unless otherwise prescribed, one-third of

the total number of members of the Central Council shall form a quorum and all

the acts of the Central Council shall be decided by a majority of the members

present and voting ;
Provided  that no decision of the Central Council

in relation to any Indian medicine shall be effective unless three members

representing Ayurveda , Siddha 

or Unani system of medicine, as the case may be, are present

at the meeting and support the decision.

9. Committees for Ayurveda ,

 Siddha and Unani 
(1) The Central Council shall constitute from

amongst its members,-
(a) a 

committee for Ayurveda ;
(b) a 

committee for Siddha ; and
(c) a 

committee for Unani ,
and each such committee shall consist of

members elected under clause (a) or clause (b) or nominated under clause (c) of

sub-section (1) of section 3 representing the Ayurveda ,

 Siddha or Unani system of

medicine, as the case may be.
(2) The Vice-President for each of the  Ayurveda , Siddha and  Unani systems of medicine elected under sub-section (3) of

section 3 shall be, respectively, the Chairman of the committees referred

to  in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section.(1).
(3) Subject to such general or special

directions as the Central Council may from time to time give, each such

committee shall be competent to deal with any matter relating to  Ayurveda , Siddha or  Unani system of medicine, as the case may be, within the

competence of the Central Council.

10. Other committees 
The Central Council may constitute from

amongst its members such other committees for general or special purposes as

the Central Council deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.

11. Meetings of committees 
(1) The committees constituted under section 9

and 10 shall meet at least once in each year at such time and place as may be

appointed by the Central Council.
(2) Unless otherwise prescribed, one-third of

the total number of members of a committee shall form a quorum, and all the

acts of the committee shall be decided by a majority of the members present and

voting.

12. Officers and other employees of Central

Council 
The Central Council shall-
(a) appoint a Registrar

who shall act as Secretary and who may also, if deemed expedient, act as

Treasurer;
(b) employ such other

persons as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act;
(c) require and take

from the Registrar, or from any other employee, such security for the due

performance of his duties as the Central Council deems necessary; and
(d) with the previous sanction of the Central

Government, fix the remuneration and allowances to be paid to the President,

Vice-President and members of the Central Council and to the Members of the

committees thereof and determine the conditions of service of the employees of

the Central Council.

13. Vacancies in the

Central Council and committees thereof not to invalidate acts, etc. 
No act or proceeding of the Central Council or

any committee thereof shall be called in question on the ground merely of the

existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Central

Council or the committee, as the case may be.

14. Recognition of medical qualifications

granted by certain medical institutions in India 
(1) The medical qualifications granted by any

University, Board or other medical institution in India which are included in

the Second Schedule shall be recognized medical qualifications for the purposes

of this Act.
(2) Any University, Board or other medical 

institution in India which grants a medical qualification not included in the 

Second Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have any such 

qualification recognized, and the Central Government, after consulting the 

Central Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Second 

Schedule so as to include such qualification therein, and any such notification 

may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the Second 

Schedule against such medical qualification declaring that it shall be a 

recognized medical qualification only when granted after a specified date

15. Recognition of medical qualifications

granted by certain medical institutions whose qualifications are not included

in Second Schedule 
The medical qualifications included in the

Third Schedule granted to a citizen of India before the 15th day of August,

1947, by any medical institution in any area which was comprised before that

date within India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935, shall also

be recognized medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act.

16. Recognition of medical qualifications granted

by medical institutions in countries with which there is a scheme of

reciprocity
(1) The medical qualifications granted by

medical institutions outside India which are included in

the Fourth Schedule shall be recognized medical qualifications for the purposes

of this Act.
(2) The Central Council may enter into

negotiations with the authority in any State or country outside India, which,

by the law of such State or country is entrusted with the maintenance of a

Register of practitioners of Indian medicine, for the settling of a scheme of

reciprocity for the recognition of medical qualifications in Indian medicine,

and in pursuance of any such scheme, the Central Government may, by

notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Fourth Schedule so as to

include therein any medical qualification which the Central Council has decided

should be recognized, and any such notification may also direct that an entry

shall be made in the last column of the Fourth Schedule against such medical

qualification declaring that it shall be recognized medical qualification only

when granted after a specified date.

17. Rights of persons possessing

qualifications included in Second, Third and Fourth Schedules to be enrolled 
(1) Subject to the other provisions contained

in this Act, any medical qualification. included in

the Second, Third or Fourth Schedule shall be sufficient qualification for

enrolment on any State Register of Indian Medicine.
(2) Save as provided in section 28, no person

other than a practitioner of Indian medicine who possesses a recognized medical

qualification and is enrolled on a State Register or the Central Register of

Indian Medicine, -
(a) shall 

hold office as Vaid , Siddha ,

Hakim or physician or any other office (by whatever designation called) in

Government or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority;
(b) shall 

practice Indian medicine in any State;
(c) shall 

be entitled to sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any

other certificate required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly

qualified medical practitioner;
(d) shall be entitled

to give evidence at any inquest or in any court of law as an expert under

section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act, l872 (1 of 1872) on any matter relating

to Indian medicine.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) shall

affect,-
(a) the 

right of a practitioner of Indian medicine enrolled on a State Register of

Indian Medicine to practice Indian medicine in any State merely on the ground

that, on the commencement of this Act, he does not possess a recognized medical

qualification;
(b) the 

privileges (including the right to practice any system of medicine) conferred by 

or under any law relating to registration of practitioners of Indian medicine 

for the time being in force in any State on a practitioner of Indian medicine 

enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine
(c) the right of a

person to practice Indian medicine in a State in which, on the commencement of

this Act, a State Register of Indian Medicine is not maintained if, on such

commencement, he has been practicing Indian medicine for not less than five

years;
(d) the 

rights conferred by or under the Indian Medical Council Act, l956 (102 of 1956)

[including the right to practice medicine as defined in clause (f) of section 2

of the said Act], on persons possessing any qualifications included in the

Schedules to the said Act.
(4) Any person who acts in contravention of

any provision of sub-section (2) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term

which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand

rupees, or with both.

18. Power to require information as to courses

of study and examination 
Every University, Board or medical institution

in India which grants a recognized medical qualification shall furnish such

information as the Central Council may, from time to time, require as to the of

study and examinations to be undergone in order to obtain such qualification,

as to the ages which such courses of study and examinations are required to be

undergone and such qualification is conferred and generally as to the

requisites for obtaining such qualification.

19. Inspectors at examinations 
(1) The Central Council shall appoint such

number of medical inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical

college, hospital or other institution where education in Indian medicine is

given, or to attend any examination held by any University, Board or medical

institution for the purpose of recommending to the Central Government

recognition of medical qualifications granted by that University, Board or

medical Institution.
(2) The medical inspectors shall not interfere

with the conduct of any training or examination, but shall report to the

Central Council on the adequacy of the standards of education including staff,

equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving

education in Indian medicine or on the sufficiency of every examination which they

attend.
(3) The Central Council shall forward a copy

of any such report to the University, Board or medical institution concerned,

and shall also forward a copy with the remarks of the University, Board or

medical institution thereon, to the Central Government.

20. Visitors at examinations 
(1) The Central Council may appoint such

number or visitors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical college,

hospital or other institution where education in Indian medicine is given or to

attend any examination for the purpose of granting recognized medical

qualifications.
(2) Any person, whether he is a member of the

Central Council or not, may be appointed as a visitor under this section but a

person who is appointed as an inspector under section 19 for any inspection or

examination shall not be appointed as a visitor for the same inspection or

examination.
(3) The visitors shall not interfere with the

conduct of any training or examination but shall report to the President of the

Central Council on the adequacy of the standards of education including staff,

equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving

education in Indian medicine or on the sufficiency of every examination which

they attend.
(4) The report of a visitor shall be treated

as confidential unless in any particular case the President of the Central

Council otherwise directs:
Provided that if the Central

Government requires a copy of the report of a visitor, the Central Council

shall furnish the same.

21. Withdrawal of recognition 
(1) When upon report by the inspector or the

visitor, it appears to the Central Council- 
(a) that 

the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency

required from candidates at any examination held by, any University, Board or

medical institution, or
(b) that the staff,

equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for instruction and

training provided in such University, Board or medical institution or in any

college or other institution affiliated to the University.
do not conform to the standard prescribed by

the Central Council the Central Council shall make a representation to that

effect to the Central Government.
(2) After considering such representation, the

Central Government may send it to the Government of the State in which the

University, Board or medical institution is situated and the State Government

shall forward it along with such remarks as it may choose to make to the

University, Board or medical institution, with an intimation of the period

within which the University, Board or medical institution may submit its

explanation to the State Government.
(3) On the receipt of the explanation or,

where no explanation is submitted within the period fixed, then, on the expiry

of that period, the State Government shall make its recommendations to the

Central Government.
(4) The Central Government, after making such

further inquiry, if any, as it may think fit, may, by notification in the

Official Gazette, direct that an entry shall be made in the appropriate

Schedule against the said medical qualification declaring that it shall be a

recognized medical qualification only when granted before a specified date, or

that the said medical qualification if granted to students of a specified

college or institution affiliated to any University shall be recognized medical

qualification only when granted before a specified date or, as the case may be,

that the said medical qualification shall be recognized medical qualification

in relation to a specified college or institution affiliated to any University

only when granted after a specified date.

22. Minimum standards of education in Indian

medicine 
(1) The Central Council may prescribe the

minimum standards of education in Indian medicine, required for granting

recognized medical qualifications by Universities, Boards or medical

institutions in  India .
(2) Copies of the draft regulations and of all

subsequent amendments thereof shall be furnished by the Central Council to all

State Governments and the Central Council shall, before submitting the

regulations or any amendment thereof, as the case may be, to the Central

Government for sanction, take into consideration the comments of any State

Government received within three months from the furnishing of the copies as

aforesaid.
(3) Each of the committees referred to in

clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section 9 shall, from time to

time, report to the Central Council on the efficacy of the regulations and may

recommend to the Central Council such amendments thereof as it may think fit.

23. The Central Register of Indian Medicine
(1) The Central Council shall cause to be maintained

in the prescribed manner, a register of practitioners in separate parts for

each of the system of Indian medicine to be known as the Central Register of

Indian Medicine which shall contain the names of all persons who are for the

time being enrolled on any State Register of Indian Medicine and who possess

any of the recognized medical qualifications.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar of

the Central Council to keep and maintain the Central Register of Indian

Medicine in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any orders made

by the Central Council, and from time to time to revise the register and

publish it in the Gazette of India and in such other manner as may be

prescribed.
(3) Such register shall be deemed to be a

public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872)

and may be proved by a copy published in the Gazette of India.

24. Supply of copies of State Register of

Indian Medicine 
Each Board shall supply to the Central Council

three printed copies of the State Register of Indian Medicine as soon as may be

after the commencement of this Act and subsequently after the first day of

April of each year, and each Board shall inform the Central Council without

delay of all additions to and other amendments in the State Register of Indian

Medicine made from time to time.

25. Registration in the Central Register of

Indian Medicine
The Register of the Central Council may on

receipt of the report of registration of a person in a State Register of Indian

Medicine or on application made in the prescribed manner by any person, enter

his name in the Central Register of Indian Medicine, provided that the

Registrar is satisfied that the person concerned is eligible under this Act for

such registration.

26. Professional conduct 
(1) The Central Council may prescribe

standards of professional conduct and etiquette and a code of ethics for

practitioners of Indian medicine.
(2) Regulations made by the Central Council

under sub-section (1) may specify which violations thereof shall constitute

infamous conduct in any professional respect, that is to say, professional

misconduct, and such provision shall have effect notwithstanding anything

contained in any law for the time being in force.

27. Removal of names from the central Register

of Indian Medicine 
(1) If the name of any person enrolled on a

State Register of Indian Medicine is removed there from in pursuance of any

power conferred by or under any law relating to registration of practitioners

of Indian medicine for the time being in force in any State, the Central

Council shall direct the removal of the name of such person from the Central

Register of Indian Medicine.
(2) Where the name of any person has been

removed from a State Register of Indian Medicine on any ground other than that

he is not possessed of the requisite medical qualifications or where any

application by the said person for restoration of his name to the State

Register of Indian Medicine has been rejected, he may appeal in the prescribed

manner and subject to such conditions, including conditions as to the payment

of a fee, as may be prescribed, to the Central Government whose decision, which

shall be given after consulting the Central Council, shall be binding on the

State Government and on the authorities concerned with the preparation of the

State Register of Indian Medicine.

28. Provisional registration for practice 
If the course of study to be undergone for obtaining

a recognized medical qualification in Indian Medicine include a period of

training after a person has passed the qualifying examination and before such

qualification is conferred on him, any such person shall, on application made

by him in this behalf, be granted provisional registration in a State Register

of Indian Medicine by the Board concerned in order to enable him to practice

Indian Medicine in an approved institution for the purpose of such training and

for no other purpose for the period aforesaid.

29. Privileges of persons who are enrolled on

the Central Register of Indian Medicine 
Subject to the conditions and restrictions

laid down in this Act regarding practice of Indian medicine by persons

possessing certain recognized medical qualifications, every person whose name

is for the time being borne on the Central Register of Indian Medicine shall be

entitled according to his qualification to practice Indian medicine in any part

of India and to recover in due course of law in respect of such practice any

expenses, charges in respect of medicaments or other appliances or any fees to

which he may be entitled.

30. Registration of additional qualifications 
(1) If any person whose name is entered in the

Central Register of Indian Medicine obtains any title, diploma or other

qualification for proficiency in Indian medicine which is a recognized medical

qualification, he shall, on application made in this behalf in the prescribed

manner, be entitled to have an entry stating such other title, diploma or other

qualification made against his name in the Central Register of Indian Medicine

either in substitution for or in addition to any entry previously made.
(2) The entries in respect of any such person

in a State Register of Indian Medicine shall be altered in accordance with the

alterations made in the Central Register of Indian Medicine.

31. Persons enrolled on Central Register of

Indian Medicine to notify change of place of residence and practice
Every person registered in the Central Register

of Indian Medicine shall notify any transfer of the place of his residence or

practice to the Central Council and to the Board concerned, within ninety days

of such transfer, failing which his right to participate in the election of

members to the Central Council or a Board shall be liable to be forfeited by

order of the Central Government either permanently or for such period as may be

specified therein.

32. Information to be furnished by Central

Council and publication thereof 
(1) The Central Council shall furnish such

reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of its accounts, and other

information to the Central Government as that Government may require.
(2) The Central Government may publish in such

manner as it may think fit, any report, copy , abstract

or other information furnished to it under this section or under section 20.

33. Commission of inquiry 
(1) Whenever it is made to appear to the

Central Government that the Central Council is not complying with any of the

provisions of this Act, the Central Government may refer the particulars of the

complaint to a commission of inquiry consisting of three persons, two of whom

shall be appointed by the Central Government, one being a Judge of a High

Court, and one by the Central Council, and such commission shall proceed to

inquire in a summary manner and to report to the Central Government as to the

truth of the matters charged in the complaint, and in case of any charge of

default or of improper action being found by the commission to have been

established, the commission shall recommend the remedies, if any, which are in

its opinion necessary.
(2) The Central Government may require the

Central Council to adopt the remedies so recommended within such time as,

having regard to the report of the commission, it may think fit, and if the

Central Council fails to comply with any such requirement, the Central

Government may amend the regulations of the Central Council, or make such

provision or order or take such other steps as may seem necessary to give

effect to the recommendations of the commission.
(3) A commission of inquiry shall have power

to administer oaths, to enforce the attendance of witnesses and the production

of documents, and shall have all such other necessary powers for the purpose of

any inquiry conducted by it as are exercised by a civil court under the Code of

Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).

34. Protection of action taken in good faith 
No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding

shall lie against the Government, the Central Council or a Board or any

committee thereof or any officer or servant of the Government or the Central

Council or the Board aforesaid for anything which is in good faith done or

intended to be done under this Act.

35. Power to make rules
(1) The Central Government may by notification

in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall

be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament

while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised

in one session or 2[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the

expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions

aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both

Houses agree that the rule should not be made the rule shall thereafter have

effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so

however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to

the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

36. Power to make regulations 
3[(1) The Central Council, may, with the

previous sanction of the Central Government, 3[by notification in the Official

Gazette,] make regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this Act,

and, without prejudice to the generally of this power, such regulations may

provide for-
(a) the 

manner of election of the President and the Vice-Presidents of the Central

Council;
(b) the 

management of the property of the Central Council and the maintenance and audit

of its accounts;
(c) the 

resignation of members of the Central Council;
(d) the 

powers and duties of the President and Vice-President;
(e) the 

summoning and holding of meetings of the Central Council and the committees

thereof, the times and places where such meetings are to be held, and the

conduct of business thereat and the number of members necessary to constitute a

quorum;
(f) the 

functions of the committees constituted under section 9 or section 10,
(g) the 

tenure of office, and the powers and duties of the Registrar and other officers

and servants of the Central Council,
(h) the 

appointment, powers, duties and procedure of inspectors and visitors;
(i)

the courses and period of study and of practical training to be undertaken, the

subjects of examination and the standards of proficiency therein to be

obtained, in any University, Board or medical institutions for grant of

recognized medical qualifications;
(j) the 

standards of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for

education in Indian medicine;
(k) the 

conduct of professional examinations, qualifications of examiners and the

conditions of admissions to such examinations;
(l) the 

standards of professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics to be

observed by practitioners of Indian medicine ;
(m) the 

particulars to be stated, and the proof of qualifications to be given in

applications for registration under this Act;
(n) the 

manner in which and the conditions subject to which an appeal under section 27

may be preferred;
(o) the 

fees to be paid on applications and appeals under this Act; and
(p) any 

matter for which under this Act provision may be made by regulations.
3[(2) The Central Government shall cause every

regulation made under this Act to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,

before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of

thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive

sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the

session .or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any

modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should

not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified

form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such

modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of

anything previously done under that regulation.]