Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993

1. Short title, extent, commencement and application 
(1) This Act may be called the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks

and Financial Institutions Act, 1993.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu

and Kashmir.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 24th day

of June, 1993.
(4) The provisions of this Act shall not apply where the amount

of debt due to any bank or financial institution or to a consortium of banks or

financial institutions is less than ten lakh rupees or such other amount, being

not less than one lakh rupees, as the Central Government may, by notification,

specify.

2. Definitions 
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
(a) "Appellate Tribunal" means an Appellate Tribunal

established under sub-section (1) of section 8;
(b) "application" means an application made to a

Tribunal under section 19;
(c) "appointed day", in relation to a Tribunal or an

Appellate Tribunal, means the date on which such Tribunal is established under

sub-section (1) of section 3 or, as the case may be, sub-section (1) of section

8;
(d) "bank" means- 
(i) a banking company;
(ii) a corresponding new bank;
(iii) State Bank of India;
(iv) a subsidiary bank; or
(v) a Regional Rural Bank;
(e) "banking company" shall have the meaning assigned

to it in clause (c) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of

1949);
 1  [(ea) "Chairperson" means a Chairperson of an

Appellate Tribunal appointed under section 9;]
(f) "corresponding new bank" shall have the meaning

assigned to it in clause (da) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949

(10 of 1949);
 2  [(g) "debt" means any liability (inclusive of

interest) which is claimed as due from any person by a bank or a financial

institution or by a consortium of banks or financial institutions during the

course of any business activity undertaken by the bank or the financial

institution or the consortium under any law for the time being in force, in

cash or otherwise, whether secured or unsecured, or assigned, or whether

payable under a decree or order of any civil court or any arbitration award or

otherwise or under a mortgage and subsisting on, and legally recoverable on,

the date of the application.]
(h) "financial institution" means- 
(i) a public financial institution within the

meaning of section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(ii) such other institution as the Central

Government may, having regard to its business activity and the area of its

operation in India, by notification, specify;
(i) "notification" means a notification published in

the Official Gazette;
(j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under

this Act;
 1  [ja) "Presiding Officer" means the Presiding

Officer of the Debts Recovery Tribunal appointed under sub-section (1) of

section 4;]
(k) "Recovery Officer" means a Recovery Officer

appointed by the Central Government for each Tribunal under sub-section (1) of

section 7;
(l) "Regional Rural Bank" means a Regional Rural Bank

established under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 (21 of 1976);


(m) "State Bank of India" means the State Bank of

India constituted under section 3 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (23 of

1955);
(n) "subsidiary bank" shall have the meaning assigned

to it in clause (k) of section 2 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks)

Act, 1959 (38 of 1959);
(o) "Tribunal" means the Tribunal established under

sub-section (1) of section 3.
Comment  : In the case in hand, there cannot be any

dispute that the expression 'debt' has to be given the widest amplitude to mean

any liability which is alleged as due from any person by a bank during the

course of any business activity undertaken by the bank either in cash or

otherwise, whether secured or unsecured, whether payable under a decree or

order of any Court or otherwise and legally recoverable on the date of the

application. In ascertaining the question whether any particular claim of any

bank or financial institution would come within the purview of the tribunal

created under the Act, it is imperative that the entire averments made by the

plaintiff in the plaint have to be looked into and then find out whether

notwithstanding the specially created tribunal having been constituted, the

averments are such that it is possible to hold that the jurisdiction of such

tribunal is ousted. United Bank of India v. Debts Recovery Tribunal AIR 1999

SUPREME COURT 1381.

3. Establishment of Tribunal 
(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish one

or more Tribunals, to be known as the Debts Recovery Tribunal, to exercise the

jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on such Tribunal by or under this

Act.
(2) The Central Government shall also specify, in the notification

referred to in sub-section (1), the areas within which the Tribunal may

exercise jurisdiction for entertaining and deciding the applications filed

before it.

4. Composition of Tribunal 
(1) A Tribunal shall consist of one person only (hereinafter referred

to as the Presiding Officer) to be appointed, by notification, by the Central

Government.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the

Central Government may authorize the Presiding Officer of one Tribunal to

discharge also the functions of the Presiding Officer of another Tribunal.

5. Qualifications for appointment as Presiding Officer 
A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Presiding

Officer of a Tribunal unless he is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a

District Judge.

6. Term of office 
The Presiding Officer of a Tribunal shall hold office for a term

of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he

attains the age of 3[sixty-two years], whichever is earlier.

7. Staff of Tribunal 
(1) The Central Government shall provide the Tribunal 4[with

one or more Recovery Officers] and such other officers and employees as that

government may think fit.
(2) 5[The Recovery Officers] and other officers and

employees of a Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the general

superintendence of the Presiding Officer.
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service

of the 6[Recovery Officers] and other officers and employees of a

Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.

8. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal 
(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish one

or more Appellate Tribunals, to be known as the Debts Recovery Appellate

Tribunal, to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on such

Tribunal by or under this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall also specify in the

notification referred to in sub-section (1) the Tribunals in relation to which

the Appellate Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction.
 1  [(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections

(1) and (2), the Central Government may authorize the Chairperson of one

Appellate Tribunal to discharge also the functions of the Chairperson of other

Appellate Tribunal.]

9. Composition of Appellate Tribunal 
An Appellate Tribunal shall consist of one person only

(hereinafter referred to as 7[the Chairperson of the Appellate

Tribunal] to be appointed, by notification, by the Central Government.

10. Qualifications for appointment as 8[Chairperson

of the Appellate Tribunal] 
A person shall not be qualified for appointment as 9[the

Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal] unless he- 
(a) is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High

Court; or
(b) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a

post in Grade I of that service for at least three years; or
(c) has held office as the Presiding Officer of a Tribunal for

at least three years.

11. Term of office 
 9  [The Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal] shall hold

office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his

office or until he attains the age of 10[sixty-five years],

whichever is earlier.

12. Staff of the Appellate Tribunal 
The provisions of section 7 (except those relating to Recovery Officer)

shall, so far as may be, apply to an Appellate Tribunal as they apply to a

Tribunal and accordingly references in that section to "Tribunal"

shall be construed as references to "Appellate Tribunal" and

references to "Recovery Officer" shall be deemed to have been

omitted.

13. Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions

of service of Presiding Officers 
The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and

conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits)

of 11[the Presiding Officer of a Tribunal or the Chairperson of an

Appellate Tribunal] shall be such as may be prescribed:
PROVIDED  that neither the salary and allowances nor

the other terms and conditions of service of 12[the Presiding

Officer of a Tribunal or the Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal shall be

varied to his] disadvantage after appointment.

14. Filling up of vacancies 
If, for any reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy

occurs in the office 11[the Presiding Officer of a Tribunal or the

Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal], then the Central Government shall

appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill

the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Tribunal or the

Appellate Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.

15. Resignation and removal 
(1) 11[the Presiding Officer of a Tribunal or the

Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal] may by notice in writing under his hand

addressed to the Central Government, resign his office:
PROVIDED  that 13[the Presiding Officer of a

Tribunal or the Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal] shall, unless he is

permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue

to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of

such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his

office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
(2) 11[The Presiding Officer of a Tribunal or the

Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal] shall not be removed from his office

except by an order made by the Central Government on the ground of proved

misbehavior or incapacity after inquiry,
(a) in the case of the Presiding Officer of a

Tribunal made by a Judge of a High Court;
(b) in the case of 14[the

Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal], made by a Judge of the Supreme Court, in

which 15[the Presiding Officer of a Tribunal or the Chairperson of

an Appellate Tribunal] the Presiding Officer concerned has been informed of the

charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in

respect of these charges.
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure

for the investigation of misbehavior or incapacity of 16[the

Presiding Officer of a Tribunal or the Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal].

16. Orders constituting Tribunal or an Appellate Tribunal

to be final, and not to invalidate its proceedings 
No order of the Central Government appointing any person as 11[The

Presiding Officer of a Tribunal or the Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal]

shall be called in question in any manner, and no act or proceeding before a

Tribunal or an Appellate Tribunal shall be called in question in any manner on

the ground merely of any defect in the constitution of a Tribunal or an

Appellate Tribunal.

17. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of Tribunals 
(1) A Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the appointed day,

the jurisdiction, powers and authority to entertain and decide applications

from the banks and financial institutions for recovery of debts due to such

banks and financial institutions.
(2) An Appellate Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the

appointed day, the jurisdiction, powers and authority to entertain appeals

against any order made, or deemed to have been made, by a Tribunal under this

Act.

18. Bar of jurisdiction 
On and from the appointed day, no court or other authority shall

have, or be entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or authority (except

the Supreme Court, and a High Court exercising jurisdiction under Articles 226

and 227 of the Constitution) in relation to the matters specified in section 17.

19. Application to the Tribunal 

(1) Where a bank or a financial institution has to recover any

debt from any person, it may make an application to the Tribunal within the

local limits of whose jurisdiction- 
(a) the defendant, or each of the defendants

where there are more than one, at the time of making the application, actually

and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain;

or
(b) any of the defendants, where there are

more than one, at the time of making the application, actually and voluntarily

resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part,

arises.
(2) Where a bank or a financial institution, which has to

recover its debt from any person, has filed an application to the Tribunal

under sub-section (1) and against the same person another bank or financial

institution also has a claim to recover its debt, then, the later bank or

financial institution may join the applicant bank or financial institution at

any stage of the proceedings, before the final order is passed, by making an

application to that Tribunal.
(3) Every application under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)

shall be in such form and accompanied by such documents or other evidence and

by such fee as may be prescribed:
PROVIDED  that the fee may be prescribed having regard

to the amount of debt to be recovered:
PROVIDED FURTHER  that nothing contained in this sub-section

relating to fee shall apply to cases transferred to the Tribunal under

sub-section (1) of section 31.
(4) On receipt of the application under sub-section (1) or

sub-section (2), the Tribunal shall issue summons requiring the defendant to

show cause within thirty days of the service of summons as to why the relief

prayed for should not be granted.
(5) The Tribunal shall, at or before the first hearing or within

such time as the Tribunal may permit, present a written statement of his

defense.
(6) Where the defendant claims to set-off against the

applicant's demand any ascertained sum of money legally recoverable by him from

such applicant, the defendant may, at the first hearing of the application, but

not afterwards unless permitted by the Tribunal, present a written statement

containing the particulars of the debt sought to be set-off.
(7) The written statement shall have the same effect as a plaint

in a cross-suit so as to enable the Tribunal to pass a final order in respect

both of the original claim and of the set-off.
(8) A defendant in an application may, in addition to his right

of pleading a set-off under sub-section (6), set up, by way of counter-claim

against the claim of the applicant, any right or claim in respect of a cause of

action accruing to the defendant against the applicant either before or after

the filing of the application but before the defendant has delivered his

defense or before the time limited for delivering his defense has expired,

whether such counter-claim is in the nature of a claim for damages or not.
(9) A counter-claim under sub-section (8) shall have the same

effect as a cross-suit so as to enable the Tribunal to pass a final order on

the same application, both on the original claim and on the counter-claim.
(10) The applicant shall be at liberty to file a written

statement in answer to the counter-claim of the defendant within such period as

may be fixed by the Tribunal.
(11) Where the defendant sets up a counter-claim and the

applicant contends that the claim thereby raised ought not to be disposed of by

way of counter-claim but in an independent action, the applicant may, at any

time before issues are settled in relation to the counter-claim, apply to the

Tribunal for an order that such counter-claim may be excluded, the Tribunal

may, on the hearing of such application make such order as it thinks fit.
(12) The Tribunal may make an interim order (whether by way of

injunction or stay or attachment) against the defendant to debar him from

transferring, alienating or otherwise dealing with, or disposing of, any

property and assets belonging to him without the prior permission of the

Tribunal.
(13)
(A) Where, at any stage of the proceedings,

the Tribunal is satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, that the defendant, with

intent to obstruct or delay or frustrate the execution of any order for the

recovery of debt that may be passed against him,
(i) is about to

dispose of the whole or any part of his property; or
(ii) is about to remove the whole or any part

of his property from the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal; or
(iii) is likely to cause any damage or

mischief to the property or affect its value by misuse or creating third party

interest, the Tribunal may direct the defendant, within a time to be fixed by

it, either to furnish security, in such sum as may be specified in the order,

to produce and place at the disposal of the Tribunal, when required, the said

property or the value of the same, or such portion thereof as may be sufficient

to satisfy the certificate for the recovery of debt, or to appear and show

cause why he should not furnish security.
(B) Where the defendant fails to show cause

why he should not furnish security, or fails to furnish the security required,

within the time fixed by the Tribunal, the Tribunal may order the attachment of

the whole or such portion of the properties claimed by the applicant as the

properties secured in his favor or otherwise owned by the defendant as appears

sufficient to satisfy any certificate for the recovery of debt.
(14) The applicant shall, unless the Tribunal otherwise directs,

specify the property required to be attached and the estimated value thereof.
(15) The Tribunal may also in the order direct the conditional

attachment of the whole or any portion of the property specified under

sub-section (14).
(16) If an order of attachment is made without complying with

the provisions of sub-section (13), such attachment shall be void.
(17) In the case of disobedience of an order made by the

Tribunal under sub-sections (12), (13) and (18) or breach of any of the terms

on which the order was made, the Tribunal may order the properties of the

person guilty of such disobedience or breach to be attached and may also order

such person to be detained in the civil prison for a term not exceeding three

months, unless in the meantime the Tribunal directs his release.
(18) Where it appears to the Tribunal to be just and convenient,

the Tribunal may, by order,- 
(a) appoint a receiver of any property,

whether before or after grant of certificate for recovery of debt;
(b) remove any person from the possession or

custody of the property;
(c) commit the same to the possession, custody

or management of the receiver;
(d) confer upon the receiver all such powers,

as to bringing and defending suits in the courts or filing and defending

applications before the Tribunal and for the realization, management,

protection, preservation and improvement of the property, the collection of the

rents and profits thereof, the application and disposal of such rents and

profits, and the execution of documents as the owner himself has, or such of

those powers as the Tribunal thinks fit; and
(e) appoint a Commissioner for preparation of

an inventory of the properties of the defendant or for the sale thereof.
(19) Where a certificate of recovery is issued against a company

registered under the Companies Act, 1956, the Tribunal may order the sale

proceeds of such company to be distributed among its secured creditors in

accordance with the provisions of section 529A of the Companies Act, 1956 and

to pay the surplus, if any, to the company.
(20) The Tribunal may, after giving the applicant and the

defendant an opportunity of being heard, pass such interim or final order,

including the order for payment of interest from the date on or before which

payment of the amount is found due up to the date of realization or actual

payment, on the application as it thinks fit to meet the ends of justice.
(21) The Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed by it to

the applicant and the defendant.
(22) The Presiding Officer shall issue a certificate under his

signature on the basis of the order of the Tribunal to the Recovery Officer for

recovery of the amount of debt specified in the certificate.
(23) Where the Tribunal, which has issued a certificate of

recovery, is satisfied that the property is situated within the local limits of

the jurisdiction of two or more Tribunals, it may send the copies of the

certificate of recovery for execution to such other Tribunals where the

property is situated:
PROVIDED  that in case where the Tribunal to which the

certificate of recovery is sent for execution finds that it has no jurisdiction

to comply with the certificate of recovery, it shall return the same to the

Tribunal which has issued it.
(24) The application made to the Tribunal under sub-section (1)

or sub-section (2) shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and

endeavor shall be made by it to dispose of the application finally within one

hundred and eighty days from the date of receipt of the application.
(25) The Tribunal may make such orders and give such directions

as may be necessary or expedient to give effect to its orders or to prevent

abuse of its process or to secure the ends of justice.]

20. Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
(1) Save as provided in sub-section (2), any person aggrieved by

an order made, or deemed to have been made, by a Tribunal under this Act, may

prefer an appeal to an Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter.
(2) No appeal shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal from an order

made by a Tribunal with the consent of the parties.
(3) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within a

period of forty-five days from the date on which a copy of the order made, or

deemed to have been made, by the Tribunal is received by him and it shall be in

such form and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:
PROVIDED  that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an

appeal after the expiry of the said period of forty five days if it is

satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it, within that

period.
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Appellate

Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being

heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or

setting aside the order appealed against.
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made

by it to the parties to the appeal and to the concerned Tribunal.
(6) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under

sub-section (1) shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and

endeavor shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within six months

from the date of receipt of the appeal.

21. Deposit of amount of debt due, on filing appeal 
Where an appeal is preferred by any person from whom the amount

of financial debt is due to a bank or a financial institution or a consortium

of banks or financial institutions, such appeal shall not be entertained by the

Appellate Tribunal unless such person has deposited with the Appellate Tribunal

seventy-five per cent of the amount of debt so due from him as determined by

the Tribunal under section 19:
PROVIDED  that the Appellate Tribunal may, for reasons

to be recorded in writing, waive or reduce the amount to be deposited under

this section.

22. Procedure and powers of the Tribunal and the Appellate

Tribunal 
(1) The Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound

by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908),

but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the

other provisions of this Act and of any rules, the Tribunal and the Appellate

Tribunal shall have powers to regulate their own procedure including the places

at which they shall have their sittings.
(2) The Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the

purposes of discharging their functions under this Act, the same powers as are

vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908),

while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely,- 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of

any person and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of

documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of

witnesses or documents;
(e) reviewing its decisions;
(f) dismissing an application for default or

deciding it ex parte;
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of

any application for default or any order passed by it ex parte;
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Any proceeding before the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal

shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and

228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),

and the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court

for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).

23. Right to legal representation and Presenting Officers
(1) A bank or a financial institution making an application to a

Tribunal or an appeal to an Appellate Tribunal may authorize one or more legal

practitioners or any of its officers to act as Presenting Officers and every

person so authorized by it may present its case before the Tribunal or the

Appellate Tribunal.
(2) The defendant may either appear in person or authorize one

or more legal practitioners or any of his or its officers to present his or its

case before the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal.

24. Limitation 
The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963, (36 of l963) shall,

as far as may be, apply to an application made to a Tribunal.

25. Modes of recovery of debts 
The Recovery Officer shall, on receipt of the copy of the

certificate under sub-section (7) of section 19, proceed to recover the amount

of debt specified in the certificate by one or more of the following modes,

namely,- 
(a) attachment and sale of the movable or immovable property of

the defendant;
(b) arrest of the defendant and his detention in prison;
(c) appointing a receiver for the management of the movable or

immovable properties of the defendant.

26. Validity of certificate and amendment thereof 
(1) It shall not be open to the defendant to dispute before the

Recovery Officer the correctness of the amount specified in the certificate, and

no objection to the certificate on any other ground shall also be entertained

by the Recovery Officer.
(2) Notwithstanding the issue of a certificate to a Recovery

Officer, the Presiding Officer shall have power to withdraw the certificate or

correct any clerical or arithmetical mistake in the certificate by sending

intimation to the Recovery Officer.
(3) The Presiding Officer shall intimate to the Recovery Officer

any order withdrawing or canceling a certificate or any correction made by him

under sub-section (2).

27. Stay of proceedings under certificate and amendment or

withdrawal thereof 
(1) Notwithstanding that a certificate has been issued to the

Recovery Officer for the recovery of any amount, the Presiding Officer may

grant time for the payment of the amount, and thereupon the Recovery Officer

shall stay the proceedings until the expiry of the time so granted.
(2) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been

issued, the Presiding Officer shall keep the Recovery Officer informed of any

amount paid or time granted for payment, subsequent to the issue of such

certificate to the Recovery Officer.
(3) Where the order giving rise to a demand of amount for

recovery of debt has been modified in appeal and, as a consequence thereof the

demand is reduced, the Presiding Officer shall stay the recovery of such part

of the amount of the certificate as pertains to the said reduction for the

period for which the appeal remains pending.
(4) Where a certificate for the recovery of debt has been received

by the Recovery Officer and subsequently the amount of the outstanding demands

is reduced 1[or enhanced] as a result of an appeal, the Presiding

Officer shall, when the order which was the subject-matter of such appeal has

become final and conclusive, amend the certificate or withdraw it, as the case

may be.

28. Other modes of recovery 
(1) Where a certificate has been issued to the Recovery Officer

under sub-section (7) of section 19, the Recovery Officer may, without

prejudice to the modes of recovery specified in section 25, recover the amount

of debt by any one or more of the modes provided under this section.
(2) If any amount is due from any person to the defendant, the

Recovery Officer may require such person to deduct, from the said amount, the

amount of debt due from the defendant under this Act and such person shall

comply with any such requisition and shall pay the sum so deducted to the

credit of the Recovery Officer:
PROVIDED  that nothing in this sub-section shall apply

to any part of the amount exempt from attachment in execution of a decree of a

civil court under section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).
(3) (i) The Recovery Officer may, at any time or from time to

time, by notice in writing, require any person from whom money is due or may

become due to the defendant or to any person who holds or may subsequently hold

money for or on account of the defendant, to pay to the Recovery Officer either

forthwith upon the money becoming due or being held or within the time specified

in the notice (not being before the money becomes due or is held), so much of

the money as is sufficient to pay the amount of debt due from the defendant or

the whole of the money when it is equal to or less than that amount.
(ii) A notice under this sub-section may be

issued to any person who holds or may subsequently hold any money for or on

account of the defendant jointly with any other person and for the purposes of

this sub-section the shares of the joint holders in such amount shall be

presumed, until the contrary is proved, to be equal.
(iii) A copy of the notice shall be forwarded

to the defendant at his last address known to the Recovery Officer and in the

case of a joint account to all the joint holders at their last addresses known

to the Recovery Officer.
(iv) Save as otherwise provided in this

sub-section, every person to whom a notice is issued under this sub-section

shall be bound to comply with such notice, and, in particular, where any such

notice is issued to a post office, bank, financial institution, or an insurer,

it shall not be necessary for any pass book, deposit receipt, policy or any

other document to be produced for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the

like to be made before the payment is made notwithstanding any rule, practice

or requirement to the contrary.
(v) Any claim respecting any property in

relation to which a notice under this sub-section has been issued arising after

the date of the notice shall be void as against any demand contained in the

notice.
(vi) Where a person to whom a notice under

this sub-section is sent objects to it by a statement on oath that the sum

demanded or the part thereof is not due to the defendant or that he does not

hold any money for or on account of the defendant, then, nothing contained in

this sub-section shall be deemed to require such person to pay any such sum or

part thereof, as the case may be, but if it is discovered that such statement

was false in any material particular, such person shall be personally liable to

the Recovery Officer to the extent of his own liability to the defendant on the

date of the notice, or to the extent of the defendant's liability for any sum

due under this Act, whichever is less.
(vii) The Recovery Officer may, at any time or

from time to time, amend or revoke any notice under this sub-section or extend

the time for making any payment in pursuance of such notice.
(viii) The Recovery Officer shall grant a

receipt for any amount paid in compliance with a notice issued under this

sub-section, and the person so paying shall be fully discharged from his

liability to the defendant to the extent of the amount so paid.
(ix) Any person discharging any liability to

the defendant after the receipt of a notice under this sub-section shall be

personally liable to the Recovery Officer to the extent of his own liability to

the defendant so discharged or to the extent of the defendant's liability for

any debt due under this Act, whichever is less.
(x) If the person to whom a notice under this

sub-section is sent fails to make payment in pursuance thereof to the Recovery

Officer, he shall be deemed to be a defendant in default in respect of the

amount specified in the notice and further proceedings may be taken against him

for the realization of the amount as if it were a debt due from him, in the

manner provided in sections 25, 26 and 27 and the notice shall have the same

effect as an attachment of a debt by the Recovery Officer in exercise of his

powers under section 25.
(4) The Recovery Officer may apply to the court in whose custody

there is money belonging to the defendant for payment to him of the entire

amount of such money, or if it is more than the amount of debt due, an amount

sufficient to discharge the amount of debt so due.
 1  [(4A) The Recovery Officer may, by order, at any stage of

the execution of the certificate of recovery, require any person, and in case

of a company, any of its officers against whom or which the certificate of

recovery is issued, to declare on affidavit the particulars of his or its

assets.]
(5) The Recovery Officer may recover any amount of debt due from

the defendant by distraint and sale of his movable property in the manner laid

down in the Third Schedule to the Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).

29. Application of certain provisions of Income Tax Act 
The provisions of the Second and Third Schedules to the Income

Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), and the Income Tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules,

1962, as in force from time to time shall, as far as possible, apply with

necessary modifications as if the said provisions and the rules referred to the

amount of debt due under this Act instead of to the Income Tax Act:
PROVIDED  that any reference under the said provisions

and the rules to the "assessee" shall be construed as a reference to

the defendant under this Act.

30. Appeal against the order of Recovery

Officer 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 29, any person

aggrieved by an order of the Recovery Officer made under this Act may, within

thirty days from the date on which a copy of the order is issued to him, prefer

an appeal to the Tribunal.
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Tribunal

may, after giving an opportunity to the appellant to be heard, and after making

such enquiry as it deems fit, confirm, modify or set aside the order made by

the Recovery Officer in exercise of his powers under sections 25 to 28 (both

inclusive).]

31. Transfer of pending cases 
(1) Every suit or other proceeding pending before any court

immediately before the date of establishment of a Tribunal under this Act,

being a suit or proceeding the cause of action whereon it is based is such that

it would have been, if it had arisen after such establishment, within the

jurisdiction of such Tribunal, shall stand transferred on that date to such

Tribunal:
PROVIDED  that nothing in this sub-section shall apply

to any appeal pending as aforesaid before any court.
(2) Where any suit or other proceeding stands transferred from

any court to a Tribunal under sub-section (1):
(a) the court shall, as soon as may be after

such transfer, forward the records of such suit or other proceeding to the

Tribunal; and
(b) the Tribunal may, on receipt of such

records, proceed to deal with such suit or other proceeding, so far as may be,

in the same manner as in the case of an application made under section 19 from

the stage which was reached before such transfer or from any earlier stage 17[***]

as the Tribunal may deem fit.

32. Chairperson, Presiding Officer and staff

of Appellate Tribunal and Tribunal to be public servants 

The Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal, the Presiding Officer

of a Tribunal, the Recovery Officer and other officers and employees of an

Appellate Tribunal and a Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within

the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]

33. Protection of action taken in good faith 
No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against

the Central Government or against 11[the Presiding Officer of a

Tribunal or the Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal] or against the Recovery

Officer for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in

pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.

34. Act to have overriding effect 
(1) Save as provided under sub-section (2), the provisions of

this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith

contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument

having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
(2) The provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder

shall be in addition to and not in derogation of, the Industrial Finance

Corporation Act, 1948 (15 of 1948), the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951

(63 of 1951), the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963 (52 of 1963), the Industrial

Reconstruction Bank of India Act, 1984 (62 of 1984), and 18[the Sick

Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 and the Small Industries

Development Bank of India Act, 1989.]

35. Power to remove difficulties 
(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions

of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official

Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this

Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
PROVIDED  that no such order shall be made after the

expiry of the period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be

after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.

36. Power to make rules 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to

carry out the provisions of this Act
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the

foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following

matters, namely,- 
(a) the salaries and allowances and other

terms and conditions of service of 19[the Chairpersons, the

Presiding Officers], Recovery Officers and other officers and employees of the

Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunals under sections 7, 12 and 13;
(b) the procedure for the investigation of

misbehavior or incapacity of 20[the Chairpersons of Appellate

Tribunals and the Presiding Officers of the Tribunals] under sub-section (3) of

section 15;
(c) the form in which an application may be

made under section 19, the documents and other evidence by which such

application shall be accompanied and the fees payable in respect of the filing

of such application;
(d) the form in which an appeal may be filed

before the Appellate Tribunal under section 20 and the fees payable in respect

of such appeal;
(e) any other matter which is required to be,

or may be, prescribed.
 2  [(3) Every Notification issued under sub-section (4) of

section 1, section 3 and section 8 and every rule made by the Central

Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,

before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of

thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive

sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the

session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any

modification in the notification or rule or both Houses agree that the

notification or rule should not be issued or made, the notification or rule

shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as

the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be

without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that

notification or rule.]

37. Repeal and saving 
(1) The Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial

Institutions Ordinance, 1993 (Ord. 25 of 1993), is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action

taken under the corresponding Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or

taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.